Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are
going to be talking about measurements.
Why do we use certain universally
agreed upon measurements of length,
weight, and time, where did this all
come from, and what does it mean?
It might sound like a mundane, boring
subject, but in today’s episode we’ll go
from Ancient Egypt to Medieval England,
we’ll meet French revolutionaries
with revolutionary ideas about the
weights and dates, we’ll find out
why shipping containers are in fact
revolutionary, and we’ll learn that
it’s only by chance that ice doesn’t
freeze at 100 degrees Centigrade.
OK, then, A Short History of Measurements.
Imagine, if you will, a
world without measurements.
No hours, no metres, no
weights, no temperatures.
It would certainly make life somewhat
trickier, somewhat more difficult.
But of course, before humans, there
were no measurements;  every measurement
is a human invention, these hugely
important parts of everyday life are
completely man-made, they are artificial.
So, in this episode we are going
to look at two broad categories of
the development of measurements.
Firstly, the creation of
measurements, from length to time.
And secondly, the standardisation of these
measurements, because having a measurement
isn’t very useful if there isn’t a
universally agreed-upon definition.
If my kilogramme is twice as heavy
as your kilogramme and half as
heavy as my neighbour’s kilogramme,
what’s the point of calling it
a kilogramme in the first place?
So, first off, let’s talk about an
old English measurement of distance.
To those of you who have been to the UK
and seen signs about something called
miles, no I’m not talking about that.
I’m actually talking about
something older, a measurement
that you might not have heard of
unless you are a horse racing fan.
And this is the Furlong.
Now, from an etymological point
of view, this word comes from a
combination of two words in Old English.
Furh, the old word for “furrow”,
which is the hollow trench, the
hole, that a plough carves in the
ground, and long, meaning, well, long.
A furlong was the distance that a
pair of oxen or working cows who
were pulling the plough could cover
before they needed to stop for a rest.
Clever, right?
But obviously somewhat inaccurate.
If you had two lazy oxen who needed
to rest after 30 seconds, your
furlong would be pretty short.
And if you had two super strong
oxen who wouldn’t get tired, well
a furlong would be quite long.
Nevertheless, the furlong was a common
measurement, and it would go on to be
a measurement that would be used to
calculate the size of what became the
English acre, or the size of a field.
Interestingly enough, the furlong was an
official British measurement until 1985!
By the way, if you’re still wondering
about how long a furlong actually
is, it is now universally agreed at
201 metres, although if you go to
the UK and you ask someone how many
furlongs it is to a museum, they will
give you a slightly confused look.
Anyway, we’ll see a theme here, that
measurements understandably originate
from semi-universal activities, activities
that would be the same anywhere, that
often used physical objects or activities
that everyone would be aware of and
would be at least somewhat similar.
Now, let’s move across the English
Channel and look at another
interesting example from France.
You’ll see that the French approached
a similar problem, of how to
measure distance and the area of
a field, in a very different way.
In one part of France - Bourges - land
was measured by how many baskets of
seeds would be required to sow it.
This basket size was called a setier.
This meant that the agreed unit,
the amount of land that could be
sown using that amount of seeds,
became known as the seterée.
Clearly, much like the English example
of lazy or strong oxen creating
different interpretations of a
furlong, a seterée wasn’t an exact
measurement, as everyone would sow
their seeds slightly differently.
This being said, using this unit was
actually more useful than you might
think, because it did give you - in
some respects - a better understanding
of how productive a piece of land would
be than simply saying how big it was.
If land was unevenly distributed, or
there were bushes or ponds in the middle,
this seterée measurement took this into
account, while if you were calculating
the dimensions of the field, this
calculation would be more complicated.
It was still, however, like
the furlong, imperfect.
Both the furlong and the seterée were
what we’d call elastic measurements,
measurements that change depending
on who is doing the measuring.
As you can imagine, they aren’t
particularly good forms of measurements,
but these elastic measurements have
been the dominant type of measurement
for almost all of human history.
Now, if we move from the physical
world to the theoretical world, and
talk about the artificial construct of
splitting time into different units,
for the majority of human history, units
of time have had different lengths.
For example, the ancient Egyptians
simply counted 10 units of daylight,
and added two additional ones for the
early morning and the evening time.
This worked fine for
the ancient Egyptians.
They were pretty close to the equator, so
the length of a day didn’t vary too much.
But clearly, the further you are away
from the equator, the less useful
this form of measurement becomes.
So, take a Londoner
in, say, the year 1500.
Using a similar form of measurement
their hour could vary from 38
minutes in the depths of winter to 82
minutes in the middle of summer when
there were more hours of sunlight.
At first glance, you might think
that this would've made life very
complicated for our Medieval Londoner.
But, as far as the records show, it
actually wasn’t so much of an issue.
Thinking of an hour as a
consistent measure simply was
not part of how people thought.
The majority of people
worked outside on the land.
It was second nature to adapt to
the changing rhythm of the season.
What’s more, church bells would
ring throughout the day to mark
the hours and you would rarely
need to pre-arrange an exact time
with someone coming from far away.
So you simply didn’t
need to worry about it.
Now, we’ve looked at length and
time, and seen some examples how
this was approached by the English,
the French and the Egyptians.
It’s now time to move on to the
second section of this little
exploration, where we look at
attempts to standardise measurements.
For this, let’s look at perhaps the
greatest and most successful human
experiment with standardising distance
and weight – the metric system.
In order to do this I need to
take you back to France in the
early 1700s when the seeds of the
French Revolution were being sown.
Central to the grievances or complaints
of the French peasants was the way
in which, when selling their goods
in markets, they often felt cheated
by merchants and aristocrats who
were in greater positions of power.
There were literally hundreds of different
measurements across the whole of France.
The varieties were usually regional,
in other words, they were only used
in particular parts of the country.
When the national assembly, or the
Estates General, met in 1789 in
the lead up to the Revolution, a
demand to standardise weights and
measures was high on the agenda.
Interestingly, this issue was mentioned
more frequently than complaints
about the courts or about the
infringement of personal liberties.
And it’s from here that
the metric system was born.
It came both from the urgent need to
solve this pressing, practical problem
and a more idealistic motive which
had to do with the Enlightenment.
If you know much about The Enlightenment,
or you’ve listened to episode number
149, you’ll remember that this movement,
which had at its core the idea that
science and reason could solve many
of humanity's problems, the movement
was particularly strong in France.
So, French Enlightenment thinkers set
out to create a new system of weights
and measures which was based not on
the size of a human’s foot or hand
or how far his oxen could plough, but
on proper mathematical principles.
Allied to this system was
the desire to make things
simpler through decimalisation.
This movement was spearheaded by
two highly regarded men, astronomers
with a mission, Jean-Baptiste
Delambre and Pierre Méchain.
Their heroic task, which began
in 1792, was to calculate the
Meridian, or the distance from
the North Pole to the South Pole.
Why?
Because they had decided that the
metric unit of measurement, the
metre, should be the length of the
Meridian divided by 10 million.
Simple?
Well, not really.
Using the best techniques of measurement
available at the time, which can
actually be traced back to work of
the Greek mathematician Euclid, by
the way, these two men set about doing
this through measuring the distance
of a proportion of the Meridian.
In practice, this meant calculating
the exact distance from the French
coastal port of Dunkerque, via Paris,
to the Spanish city of Barcelona.
They started in 1792, the year
before the luckless King Louis XVI
was executed, and finished in 1795.
One went North and the other went South.
After further deliberations and a huge
amount of checking their calculations, on
the 22nd of June 1799 the definitive metre
length platinum bar was unveiled in Paris.
They got it almost right, only
miscalculating by 0.02% because
they hadn’t taken into account
the flattening of the Earth.
But it’s still pretty
good going if you ask me.
Now, on to creating the standard
measurement of weight, the kilogramme.
The kilogramme was originally defined
as being the weight of the volume
of 1,000 cubic centimetres of water.
Essentially, if you have a box, 10cm by
10cm by 10cm and fill that with water,
that should weigh exactly one kilogramme.
Through some pretty complicated
technical calculations, the
mathematicians eventually arrived
at this common unit of weight, which
was captured through the original,
exact platinum kilogramme weight.
And the metric system has,
clearly, been an enormous success.
It's now used by 95% of
the world’s population.
But not all attempts to make
the system of measurement more
logical have had the same success.
After the great success of the
creation of the metric system, the
French also tried to replicate it
with the system of measuring time.
On June the 8th of 1794, the influential
French revolutionary, Robespierre,
celebrated something called the
Festival of the Supreme Being.
This was a festival in celebration
of the new way of telling
the time, the decimal way.
Gone were the old fashioned
months, based on Roman gods.
Gone were the illogical 24
hour days and seven day week.
Instead, we had a calendar based
on the activities for rural France.
There were 10 months, each
with 3 weeks of 10 days each.
Every month got a new name, based
on what was happening in France.
In the Spring there was the
month of flowering, Floreal.
The hottest month was called Thermidor
and the coldest was called Nivôse, which
comes from the French word for snow.
Within each week of 10 days, the
day would be split into 10 hours,
each of 100 minutes and 100 seconds.
If you’ve been doing the maths in
your head - firstly, congratulations
- and secondly, you’ll have worked
out that one second in this system
was equal to 0.864 seconds today.
But if this is all giving you a bit
of a sore head and you are wondering
whether you need to know more about
it if you travel to Paris, fear not.
Although the Revolution and the
introduction of the metric system
undoubtedly was a massive achievement
for France and the rest of the world,
these plans to make time and weeks
decimal did not have the same effect.
The system of decimal time was
abandoned after two years, and the
Republican calendar after twelve.
Now, moving to the present day, it’s
time to talk about an invention that
has revolutionised global trade.
And one you might not think about:
the standardised shipping container.
Now, what is a shipping container?
Put simply, it's only a steel
box with standard dimensions.
It’s 8 feet across, or 2.44 metres.
It’s 8'6" tall, or 2.59 metres.
And it’s either 20 or 40 feet long,
so that’s 6.10 or 12.2 metres long.
The dimensions in themselves aren’t
important, but rather the fact that
practically every shipping container
in the world uses the same ones.
The reason the standardisation
of the container was so important
was that it massively reduced the
time required to load and unload
goods onto ships and railways.
Before, there was a team of men who
were employed to load and unload
everything, packing it and unpacking it.
It took a long time and was expensive.
In the 1950s, an American entrepreneur
called Malcolm McLean had an idea: to
create a standard size so that the boxes
could be packed and unpacked away from
the dock, thereby saving time and money.
His invention was a rip roaring success.
The boxes could be packed on top of
each other like Lego bricks, they
could be easily loaded and unloaded,
and to this day these are the standard
dimensions for a shipping container.
Now, before we end this episode, we
have time for three curiosities, or
pieces of trivia about measure ment.
Let me start with one that is particularly
British, but might reveal something
about Britain, the British people, and
how we aren’t sure exactly what we want.
In the same way that, as Brexit
showed, Britain has always had an
uneasy relationship with Europe,
so it has an uneasy or ambivalent
relationship with the metric system.
Brits will talk quite naturally about
"going for a pint" at the same time as in
discussing "running the hundred metres."
In British towns, signs indicating
the distance on foot paths tend
to be in metres, but on the roads,
you talk about miles per hour,
miles per gallon and how many miles
it is from London to Birmingham.
Strangely enough, the UK is the only
country that still uses both systems,
although the Imperial system of pounds
and ounces is used less and less
every year, even if our friends over
the pond still insist on using it.
Now, for our second curiosity we must
travel to the USA and specifically visit
the United States' National Institute
of Standards and Technology or the NIST.
This organisation establishes
the standards for everything
from peanut butter to cigarettes.
For example, the standard jar of
peanut butter has exact proportions
of carbohydrates, proteins, sugars and
fibre that are set down by the NIST.
Every atom in the jar, including
all the chemical properties and
trace elements are measured and
established by this organisation.
The standard cigarette, on the other
hand, which is known by its standard
reference materials or SRM [#1196 in this
case by the way] can be found at NIST.
You might think that it’s somewhat
unnecessary to have a standard measure
of cigarette, but it does have its uses
especially when it comes to safety.
As you may know, cigarettes left on
beds or sofas after the smoker has
fallen asleep are one of the main
causes of death by fire in the home.
In order therefore to test the resistance
to fire of mattresses, sofas and sheets
a standard cigarette needs to be used.
This scientific emphasis on sameness
and consistency may seem a little
dull, a little boring and unnecessary,
but it is saving lives every day.
Now, our final curiosity has to do
with temperature - something we have
not covered yet today, but clearly
something we are all aware of.
Again, our friends in the USA are
slightly strange here, as they are
one of the three countries in the
world that still uses Fahrenheit.
If you’re interested, the other two
are Liberia and the Cayman Islands.
If you’re from a sensible,
Centigrade-using country, it may surprise
you to find out that the Centigrade
system, which was invented by a Swedish
scientist called Anders Celsius in 1741,
was originally the other way round.
In other words, Celsius’ original
scale had 100º C at the bottom for the
temperature at which water freezes and 0º
C at the top for water’s boiling point.
No one knows exactly when the scale
was inverted or turned around, but,
just think, you could just as easily
be talking about winter coming and
with it the temperature rising to 100*.
So, there you go, whether you’re buying
vegetables in a supermarket, you’re
wondering how long it will take you to
get to your friend’s house, or you’re
shocked at how much weight you’ve put on
in December, next time you step on the
scales or get out your measuring tape,
I hope you’ll realise that there’s much
more to measurements than meets the eye.
OK then, that is it for today's
episode on A Short History of
Measurements, this interesting story
of something we can all relate to
but that has a fascinating history.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode.
Can you imagine a world
without measurements?
What are some other interesting stories
of measurements that we didn’t mention?
Do you think we’ll ever attempt to move
to a different system of measuring time?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.